Oil prices: caution ahead of Fed meeting; Middle East tensions spike Skip Navigation Markets Pre-Markets U.S. Markets Europe Markets China Markets Asia Markets World Markets Currencies Cryptocurrency Futures & Commodities Bonds Funds & ETFs Business Economy Finance Health & Science Media Real Estate Energy Climate Transportation Industrials Retail Wealth Sports Life Small Business Investing Personal Finance Fintech Financial Advisors Options Action ETF Street Buffett Archive Earnings Trader Talk Tech Cybersecurity Enterprise Internet Media Mobile Social Media CNBC Disruptor 50 Tech Guide Politics White House Policy Defense Congress Equity and Opportunity Europe Politics China Politics Asia Politics World Politics Video Latest Video Full Episodes Livestream Top Video Live Audio Europe TV Asia TV CNBC Podcasts CEO Interviews Digital Originals Watchlist Investing Club Trust Portfolio Analysis Trade Alerts Meeting Videos Homestretch Jim's Columns Education Subscribe Sign In PRO Pro News Livestream Full Episodes Stock Screener Market Forecast Options Investing Chart Investing Subscribe Sign In Livestream Menu Make It select ALL SELECT Credit Cards Loans Banking Mortgages Insurance Credit Monitoring Personal Finance Small Business Taxes Help for Low Credit Scores Investing SELECT All Credit Cards Find the Credit Card for You Best Credit Cards Best Rewards Credit Cards Best Travel Credit Cards Best 0% APR Credit Cards Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards Best Cash Back Credit Cards Best Credit Card Welcome Bonuses Best Credit Cards to Build Credit SELECT All Loans Find the Best Personal Loan for You Best Personal Loans Best Debt Consolidation Loans Best Loans to Refinance Credit Card Debt Best Loans with Fast Funding Best Small Personal Loans Best Large Personal Loans Best Personal Loans to Apply Online Best Student Loan Refinance SELECT All Banking Find the Savings Account for You Best High Yield Savings Accounts Best Big Bank Savings Accounts Best Big Bank Checking Accounts Best No Fee Checking Accounts No Overdraft Fee Checking Accounts Best Checking Account Bonuses Best Money Market Accounts Best CDs Best Credit Unions SELECT All Mortgages Best Mortgages Best Mortgages for Small Down Payment Best Mortgages for No Down Payment Best Mortgages with No Origination Fee Best Mortgages for Average Credit Score Adjustable Rate Mortgages Affording a Mortgage SELECT All Insurance Best Life Insurance Best Homeowners Insurance Best Renters Insurance Best Car Insurance Travel Insurance SELECT All Credit Monitoring Best Credit Monitoring Services Best Identity Theft Protection How to Boost Your Credit Score Credit Repair Services SELECT All Personal Finance Best Budgeting Apps Best Expense Tracker Apps Best Money Transfer Apps Best Resale Apps and Sites Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL) Apps Best Debt Relief SELECT All Small Business Best Small Business Savings Accounts Best Small Business Checking Accounts Best Credit Cards for Small Business Best Small Business Loans Best Tax Software for Small Business SELECT All Taxes Filing For Free Best Tax Software Best Tax Software for Small Businesses Tax Refunds Tax Brackets Tax Tips Tax By State Tax Payment Plans SELECT All Help for Low Credit Scores Best Credit Cards for Bad Credit Best Personal Loans for Bad Credit Best Debt Consolidation Loans for Bad Credit Personal Loans if You Don't Have Credit Best Credit Cards for Building Credit Personal Loans for 580 Credit Score or Lower Personal Loans for 670 Credit Score or Lower Best Mortgages for Bad Credit Best Hardship Loans How to Boost Your Credit Score SELECT All Investing Best IRA Accounts Best Roth IRA Accounts Best Investing Apps Best Free Stock Trading Platforms Best Robo-Advisors Index Funds Mutual Funds ETFs Bonds USA INTL Livestream Search quotes, news & videos Livestream Watchlist SIGN IN Markets Business Investing Tech Politics Video Watchlist Investing Club PRO Livestream Menu Oil Prices and News Oil falls as concerns about Mideast supply ease Published Sun, Oct 29 2023 11:17 PM EDT Updated Mon, Oct 30 2023 3:43 PM EDT Lee Ying Shan @in/ying-shan-lee @LeeYingshan WATCH LIVE Key Points Oil prices dipped even after Israel sent ground forces into the Gaza Strip, as investors closely monitor the U.S. Federal Reserve’s monetary policy meeting later this week. Markets are likely to add an additional war-risk premium this week given the latest developments, said analysts. In an aerial view, the Valero Houston refinery seen on August 28, 2023 in Houston, Texas. Brandon Bell | Getty Images Oil prices dipped even after Israel sent ground forces into the Gaza Strip, raising tensions in the Middle East, as investors closely monitor the U.S. Federal Reserve's monetary policy meeting later this week. Global benchmark Brent was down 2.8% at $87.89 per barrel. The U.S. West Texas Intermediate futures last declined 3.5% to $82.57 per barrel. "I think the market had priced in the incursion on Friday and tonight is more 'sell the fact,'" Bob McNally, president of Rapidan Energy Group, told CNBC via email. He said the ground operations were "limited so far" and noted other macroeconomic concerns. The Fed is expected to leave rates unchanged at the end of its two-day meeting on Wednesday, after the U.S. economy grew faster than expected at a 4.9% annual pace in the third quarter. "Recent U.S. economic data does not seem to provide much room for the Fed to back away from its high-for-longer rate stance, while China's upcoming PMI read may still reveal downside risks to economic conditions," said IG's Market Strategist Yeap Jun Rong. He pointed out that both seem to cast some near-term reservations for oil prices to follow through with recent gains. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said during a Saturday press conference that Israel has entered its second phase of the war, in what he expects will be "long and difficult" as the country expands its ground operations in the strip. Oil prices surged late Friday, with Brent jumping above $90 per barrel as Israel said its troops were ‘increasing the ground operation’ in Gaza as it seeks to eradicate the militant group Hamas . "While a major oil supply disruption is not our base case, the oil market last week became a little too complacent about the likelihood of a major Israeli ground incursion in Gaza, and the risk of a wider regional war," McNally continued. The escalation of the war raises the risk around supply disruptions that have been hanging over the market since Hamas's attack. Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Research Markets are likely to add an additional war-risk premium given the latest developments. More risk premium may be factored into the price of crude oil this week, McNally forecasts. ANZ echoed similar projections. "The escalation of the war raises the risk around supply disruptions that have been hanging over the market since Hamas's attack," ANZ wrote in a daily note on Monday. While U.S. crude futures were up only 3.3% since Hamas' attack on Oct. 7, the potential for a broader conflict to evolve is keeping markets on edge, the bank continued. While both Israel and the Palestinian territories are not major oil players, the conflict sits in a wider key oil producing region, raising concerns the war could widen beyond Gaza. On Sunday, U.S. National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan said the U.S. sees an "elevated risk" of the conflict spilling over to other parts in the Middle East region. Stock Chart Icon Stock chart icon Oil prices year-to-date Particularly, worries about the involvement of Iran have been on the horizon . Iran is a major oil producer and key backer of Hamas. Israel's military has accused Iran of ordering attacks by militia groups it supports in Yemen, Iraq and Lebanon, supplying Hamas with intelligence and deploying an online messaging campaign to strengthen anti-Israel sentiment. Bank of America last week cautioned that any retaliation against Tehran could risk the passage of vessels through the Strait of Hormuz, a vital channel considered to be the world's most important oil transit chokepoint . If the strait is closed, oil prices can spike above $250 per barrel, the bank said in the note. Subscribe to CNBC PRO Subscribe to Investing Club Licensing & Reprints CNBC Councils Supply Chain Values CNBC on Peacock Join the CNBC Panel Digital Products News Releases Closed Captioning Corrections About CNBC Internships Site Map Ad Choices Careers Help Contact News Tips Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you. Get In Touch CNBC Newsletters Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox Sign Up Now Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. Advertise With Us Please Contact Us Privacy Policy CA Notice Terms of Service © 2024 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis. Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers Data also provided by