Israel war may cause recession, $150 oil, 20% stock hit | Fortune Home News Tech Finance Leadership Well Recommends Fortune 500 Home Page Already have an account? SIGN IN SEARCH Subscribe Now Sections FORTUNE 500 News Europe Asia Tech AI Finance Personal Finance Real Estate Crypto Leadership Success Well Life Health Mind Family Aging Well Recommends Credit Cards Banking Best High-Yield Savings Accounts Best Savings Accounts Best CD Rates Best Money Market Accounts Savings Calculator Insurance Mortgages Investing Loans Health Education Top Business Schools Top Information Technology and Data Schools Top Health Schools Business Solutions Video Rankings FORTUNE 500 GLOBAL 500 MOST POWERFUL WOMEN GREAT PLACE TO WORK LISTS BEST MBA PROGRAMS MORE RANKINGS Fortune Company List Analytics Newsletters Magazine December 2023/January 2024 October/November 2023 August/September 2023 June/July 2023 April/May 2023 February/March 2023 Live Media CEO Initiative Newsletters · CEO Daily A spiraling Israel-Hamas war could plunge the global economy into recession and depress the stock market by 20%, warns EY economist BY Peter Vanham and Nicholas Gordon Even companies without a Middle East presence could be affected by an "uncontained" war in the region. Aris Messinis—AFP via Getty Images Good morning, Peter Vanham here in Geneva. The Israel-Hamas war has deeply divided societies around the world, including many companies and institutions . But as the Israeli offensive in Gaza intensifies, companies will have to shift gears from talking about the conflict and its impact on employees to dealing with its economic ramifications. Those could be so severe that they could plunge the world back into a recession, cause oil prices to surge to $150, and depress stock prices by some 20%, EY -Parthenon’s chief economist Gregory Daco told me. Even companies that have no business in the Middle East would then be caught in its economic fallout. “If your market is 90% U.S.-based, in the Midwest, why should you care about the [conflict]? Well, you will have to care because it will have consequences that will affect your business,” Daco said. “Depending on how diffuse the situation becomes, the consequences could go from very marginal to significant.” The hypothetical situation outlined above, which Daco dubbed the “uncontained” scenario, includes a widening of the front to Lebanon and Syria, direct involvement of the U.S. and Iran, and wider social unrest in the Middle East. That outcome isn’t more likely than a more contained scenario, which would limit the war to a ground offensive in Gaza and have almost no long-term global economic consequences. Still, CEOs better take all possibilities into account as they plan ahead. The prospect of long-term economic consequences also points to a definitive end to the days in which multinational companies could simply forecast economic growth, trade, and manufacturing costs for their global markets. They must also factor in the constant threat of disruptive forces like political and social turmoil and war. “Reshoring” and “nearshoring” can provide relief from possible trade disruptions resulting from the Middle East conflict in the Strait of Hormuz or the Suez Canal, but no one can run away from rising oil prices, inflation, a recession, or a drop in the stock market. “Resilience” and “geostrategy” are my nominees for the buzzwords of 2023. More news below. Peter Vanham peter.vanham@fortune.com @petervanham TOP NEWS Cruise loses a safe harbor California’s Department of Motor Vehicles abruptly ordered Cruise–the autonomous driving unit of General Motors–to take its robotaxis off of state roads months after approving the self-driving cars. The agency cited an “unreasonable risk to public safety,” including one incident in which an autonomous vehicle struck a pedestrian. GM lost $723 million on Cruise last quarter. Reuters Microsoft earnings Microsoft reported better-than-expected results on both its bottom- and top-lines as the tech company’s investment in AI begins to pay off. The company generated $56.5 billion in revenue last quarter, a 13% year-on-year jump. Microsoft hopes AI will be its next big source of growth; it invested $10 billion in ChatGPT developer OpenAI at the beginning of the year. Fortune Giving up on China Japanese car company Mitsubishi announced its withdrawal from China. The company’s local partner, the Guangzhou Automobile Group, will take over its operations. The company expects to lose $162 million from its China retreat. Foreign car manufacturers from Japan and Germany are now facing stiff competition from China's domestic brands, particularly in the EV space. Nikkei Asia AROUND THE WATERCOOLER 1-800-Flowers CEO shares how he made his first billion—and the best business advice he received from JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon by Ruth Umoh The standard American household is now a millionaire, according to the Federal Reserve by Orianna Rosa Royle Billionaire CEO of the biggest owner of commercial real estate says remote employees ‘didn’t work as hard’ by Paolo Confino Spotify CEO Daniel Ek says he couldn’t have built the platform if he came up with it today—and he’s blaming Apple by Ryan Hogg Meta is being sued by a majority of U.S. states for allegedly fueling the national youth mental health crisis. Parents don’t have to wait for a verdict to intervene by Alexa Mikhail Chinese retailers are already slashing the prices of the iPhone 15 by over $100 amid reports of a sluggish launch for Apple’s latest smartphone by Lionel Lim This edition of CEO Daily was curated by Nicholas Gordon. This is the web version of CEO Daily , a newsletter of must-read insights from Fortune CEO Alan Murray. Sign up to get it delivered free to your inbox. Latest in Newsletters 0 minutes ago Newsletters - Eye on AI Legal tech startup Robin AI raises another $25 million—and what that says about the AI boom BY Jeremy Kahn 0 minutes ago Newsletters - MPW Daily Exclusive: Ex-Netflix, Uber CMO Bozoma Saint John launches her own haircare and wig brand—with ‘a couple million’ of her own money BY Emma Hinchliffe and Nina Ajemian 0 minutes ago Newsletters - CHRO Daily Here’s how Canva’s Leadership Academy is training middle managers to become coaches BY Emma Burleigh and Brit Morse 0 minutes ago Newsletters - CFO Daily Brian Niccol’s replacement officially becomes Chipotle’s new CEO BY Sheryl Estrada 0 minutes ago Newsletters - Term Sheet VCs are betting on online casinos after the success of sports gambling BY Leo Schwartz 0 minutes ago Newsletters - Data Sheet Prepare for reduced LLM speed ahead BY Alexei Oreskovic Most Popular 0 minutes ago Finance Expect a ‘huge sucking sound’ of foreign capital flooding in as U.S. dominance of global finance increases, top economist says BY Jason Ma 0 minutes ago Retail Lindt admits its chocolate isn’t actually ‘expertly crafted with the finest ingredients’ in lawsuit over lead levels in dark chocolate BY AFP 0 minutes ago Tech Trump calls for investigation into possible ‘illegal’ rumors saying he wants to sell his Trump Media shares BY Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez 0 minutes ago Magazine 60 direct reports, but no 1-on-1 meetings: How an unconventional leadership style helped Jensen Huang of Nvidia become one of the most powerful people in business BY Jeremy Kahn 0 minutes ago Retail 1.4 million Honda and Acura cars are being targeted in a federal investigation because their engines can fail BY The Associated Press 0 minutes ago Success Gen Z and millennial worker productivity is being crushed by bosses who don’t understand them, top economics university research says BY Ryan Hogg Rankings 100 Best Companies Fortune 500 Global 500 Fortune 500 Europe Most Powerful Women Future 50 World’s Most Admired Companies See All Rankings Sections Finance Leadership Success Tech Asia Europe Environment Fortune Crypto Health Well Retail Lifestyle Politics Newsletters Magazine Features Commentary MPW CEO Initiative Conferences Personal Finance Recommends Customer Support Frequently Asked Questions Customer Service Portal Privacy Policy Terms of Use Single Issues for Purchase International Print Commercial Services Fortune Brand Studio Fortune Analytics Fortune Conferences Advertising Business Development About Us About Us Editorial Calendar Press Center Work at Fortune Diversity and Inclusion Terms and Conditions Site Map © 2024 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy | CA Notice at Collection and Privacy Notice | Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information FORTUNE is a trademark of Fortune Media IP Limited, registered in the U.S. and other countries. FORTUNE may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.