Auto sales and factory activity drive India's September oil demand by 1.5%: S&P Global, ET EnergyWorld India The Middle East and Africa Login Get App News Oil & Gas Renewable Economy Coal Companies Power Environment View all News Leaders Speak Events Awards Webinars Brand Solutions More Newsletters MasterClasses About Us Contact Us Advertise With Us Search Renewables Oil & Gas Coal Economy Companies Power Podcast Energy TV More Reports & Data Infographics More Oil & Gas 2 min read Auto sales and factory activity drive India's September oil demand by 1.5%: S&P Global The surge comes amid a season where the rainfall trailed by 5.6 per cent from the long-term average. On a year-on-year comparison, the total demand saw a spike of 311,000 b/d, translating to 6.7 per cent, underpinned by the nation's sturdy economic footing. Telegram Facebook Copy Link Saurav Anand , ETEnergyWorld Updated On Oct 11, 2023 at 02:41 PM IST Read by: 100 Industry Professionals Read by 100 Industry Professionals New Delhi: Aided by robust auto sales and factory activity in the lead-up to the festive season, India 's oil products demand registered a growth of 73,000 b/d in September, a month-on-month increase of 1.5 per cent, according to S&P Global Commodity Insights. The surge comes amid a season where the rainfall trailed by 5.6 per cent from the long-term average. On a year-on-year comparison, the total demand saw a spike of 311,000 b/d, translating to 6.7 per cent, underpinned by the nation's sturdy economic footing. Diesel, a crucial fuel for the mobility and agriculture sectors, recorded its consumption in September climbing by 0.4 per cent from August and 3.8 per cent from the same month last year. Data points such as the E-way bill generation and daily highway toll transactions corroborate the robust demand from the transport sector. The agriculture domain, however, witnessed some sluggishness, partly due to the rain-deficit monsoon, impacting farming activities. Advt Commenting on the trend, Himi Srivastava , Analyst - South Asia Oil Markets , S&P Global Commodity Insights, stated, "September saw India's gasoline demand jumping to 869,000 b/d. Factors like diminished rainfall and strong auto sales have ensured a resilient mobility demand, further boosted by the rising temperatures spurring the use of air conditioners in vehicles." Highlighting the future trajectory, Srivastava elaborated, "India's oil demand for 2023 is pegged to grow by 249,000 b/d, a revision upwards by 10,000 b/d from our last assessment. Middle distillates, namely gasoil and kerosene/jet fuel, are projected to drive 53 per cent of this growth, while gasoline and naphtha are estimated to contribute 28 per cent." The report also touched upon the jet fuel and kerosene scenario in September. Demand shrank to 182,000 b/d, a drop of 3 per cent from August's figures. This reduction in kerosene is attributed to consumers shifting to LPG, spurred by the government's move to slash domestic cylinder prices by 200 Rupees . Conversely, jet fuel saw a marginal uptick of 0.4 per cent month-on-month. Data sourced from AirNav Radar Box showed that while September witnessed a 1 per cent dip in domestic flights compared to August, it marked a 7 per cent rise year-on-year. International air travel surged by 3.5 per cent month-on-month and a noteworthy 19 per cent year-on-year, buoyed by summer tourism. Advt On the economic front, while the S&P Global India Manufacturing PMI for September tapered off to 57.5 from August's 58.6, the S&P Global India Services PMI exhibited a robust rise to 61, up from 60.1 in August. GST collections too showcased an uptrend, with a 10 per cent year-on-year surge and a month-on-month increment of 2 per cent. By Saurav Anand , ETEnergyWorld Published On Oct 11, 2023 at 02:41 PM IST Telegram Facebook Copy Link Be the first one to comment. Comment Now COMMENTS Comment Now Read Comment (1) All Comments By commenting, you agree to the Prohibited Content Policy Post By commenting, you agree to the Prohibited Content Policy Post Find this Comment Offensive? Choose your reason below and click on the submit button. This will alert our moderators to take actions REASONS FOR REPORTING Foul Language Defamatory Inciting hatred against a certain community Out of Context / Spam Others Report Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals Subscribe to our newsletter to get latest insights & analysis. Download ETEnergyworld App Get Realtime updates Save your favourite articles Scan to download App india srivastava himi srivastava pmi rupees airnav radar analyst - south asia oil markets s&p global india services s&p global india manufacturing pmi News See whats happening in Energy sector right now Exclusive Read and get insights from specially curated unique stories from editorial Leaders Speak Business leaders sharing their insights Events Explore and discuss challenges & trends in India's leading B2B events Awards Recognise work that not only stood out but was also purposeful Webinars Join leaders & experts for roundtables, conferences, panels and discussions Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals Subscribe to our Daily Newsletter By continuing you agree to our Privacy Policy & Terms & Conditions Advertise With Us We have various options to advertise with us including Events, Advertorials, Banners, Mailers, etc. Get in Touch Download ETEnergyworld App Save your favourite articles with seamless reading experience Get updates on your preferred social platform Follow us for the latest news, insider access to events and more. About Us Contact Us Newsletters Guest-Post Guidelines RSS Feed Sitemap RSS Feed Sitemap Guest-Post Guidelines The Economic Times Business Verticals Auto Retail Health Telecom CIO Real Estate Marketing & Advertising CFO IT Security BFSI Government Hospitality HR Legal ET TravelWorld Infra B2B CIOSEA HRSEA HREMEA Education EnergyWorldMEA Manufacturing Pharma @2024 ETEnergyworld.com. All Right Reserved. Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Cookie Settings Home News Oil & Gas Auto sales and factory activity drive India's September oil demand by 1.5%: S&P Global