Israel-Hamas war: What could it mean for India’s economy? - Frontline Leading the Debate Since 1984 Get Free Trial Home Current Issue Home Current Issue Latest The Nation Politics Columns Newsletters | Buy Print Login Account Subscribe Go to Search Login Account Subscribe Go to Search Sections News The Nation Politics Economy Arts & Culture Social Issues Science & Technology Environment Books Health World Affairs Features Travel Letters Data Stories Columns Interviews Photo Essay Essentials Newsletter Sign-up Print Subscription Digital Subscription Sitemap RSS feeds Digital Exclusive Stories Print Edition Current Issue Past Issues CONNECT WITH US Home News Economy SPOTLIGHT Israel-Hamas war: What could it mean for India’s economy? Published : Nov 07, 2023 15:51 IST - 4 MINS READ Deutsche Welle COMMents Follow Us SHARE Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER SEE ALL Remove For the upcoming FY 2024-25, the RBI has pegged crude prices at $85 (€79) a barrel, and an exchange rate of 82.5 rupees against the US dollar. | Photo Credit: VIVEK PRAKASH The growing conflict in West Asia has raised geopolitical concerns about stable prices and oil supply. The ongoing Israel-Hamas war is causing concern in India over the conflict’s potential impact on oil prices. India is the world’s third-largest oil-consumer and importer, and although India has been increasing its oil supply from Russia since the invasion of Ukraine in 2022, a major slice of Indian imports still comes from West Asia. Between April and September 2023, 44 per cent of Indian oil imports were from West Asia, according to industry figures shared by Reuters. In October, the World Bank’s latest India Development Update (IDU) said it forecast India’s growth rate in fiscal year 2023-24 to come in at a strong 6.3 per cent, which was down from the previous 7.2 per cent amid “intensifying global headwinds”. Commodity prices seem stable, so far Experts in India are concerned that the ongoing conflict could bring fresh global gusts for the Indian economy, with elevated oil prices bringing up import costs and increasing prices for commodities and foodstuffs. Although a recent World Bank report on commodity prices found that the wider economic impact of the Israel-Hamas war would be “limited if the conflict doesn’t widen”, the outlook for commodity prices “would darken quickly if the conflict were to escalate”. “Overall oil prices have risen about 6 per cent since the start of the conflict,” it said. Also Read | How the Israel-Hamas conflict might bring Russia unexpected gains in Ukraine war In October, the International Energy Agency (IEA) also cautioned that markets “remain on tenterhooks as the crisis unfolds”. “The Middle East conflict is fraught with uncertainty, and events are fast developing. Against a backdrop of tightly balanced oil markets anticipated by the IEA for some time, the international community will remain laser-focused on risks to the region’s oil flows,” the report said. The World Bank report added that, in the case of the West Asian conflict escalating, policymakers in developing countries would then need to “take steps to manage a potential increase in headline inflation”, which includes measures to ensure food security. The report also pointed out that “given the risk of greater food insecurity, governments should avoid trade restrictions such as export bans on food and fertilizers as such measures often intensify price volatility and heighten food insecurity”. India’s risk of oil-price-driven inflation For the upcoming financial year (2024-25), the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has pegged crude prices at $85 (€79) a barrel, and an exchange rate of 82.5 rupees against the US dollar. “A 10 per cent jump in oil prices can make inflation soar by about 30 basis points and impact growth by about 15 basis points,” the RBI estimates. Economist Arun Kumar told DW that Indian oil supply could be in jeopardy if the Israel-Hamas war spreads. “Tensions will aggravate globally and there will be more supply bottlenecks and not just regarding crude,” he said. “If this happens, the Indian economy will also be adversely impacted. Exports can decline further while prices could rise and the Indian Rupee could weaken with the worsening of the balance of payment situation and decline in foreign exchange reserves,” said Kumar. Although India’s core inflation has remained under control at 4.6 per cent in September, volatile oil prices have the potential to affect inflation and growth estimates. Also Read | Scared and exhausted, Gaza rescue workers soldier on despite Israel’s air strikes Lekha Chakraborty, professor at the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, said that highest oil prices would exacerbate inflation and affect India’s current account deficit (CAD), in which the value of imported goods and services exceeds the value of exports. For now, state-run oil marketing companies are expected to absorb the higher costs, even as they face notional losses in selling fuel. India is also looking to source more oil from countries like Guyana, Canada, Gabon, Brazil, and Colombia. It has also heavily increased oil purchases from sanction-hampered Russia. In October, Russian crude accounted for nearly 35 per cent of India’s oil imports, followed by Iraq at 21 per cent and Saudi Arabia at 18 per cent. “The longer-term implications remain to be seen, of course. Any potential disruptions or fluctuations in supply will obviously impact the energy sector in India. But the larger risk factor might be political risk, and the government will need to strike a delicate balance,” Sanjay Jain, senior fellow in economics at the University of Oxford, told DW. COMMents Follow Us SHARE Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit Related stories Do Palestinians have the right to resist? The unequivocal answer is yes Gaza: Scarred, ruined, and silenced by death Occupation or withdrawal? Israel faces difficult choices in Gaza Israeli-Palestinian conflict a recurring stage for Western powers vying for global control Read the Latest Issue Federalism—The Lede Is India’s fiscal federalism breaking apart? C.P. Chandrasekhar Federalism Editor’s Note: India’s federal experiment is facing an existential crisis Vaishna Roy + SEE all Stories Frontline About us Magazine Archives Digital Exclusive Stories Current Issue Sitemap Print Subscription Digital Subscription RSS feeds Contact us Customer care Careers Group News Sites The Hindu BL on Campus Sportstar Businessline இந்து தமிழ் திசை The Hindu Centre Young World Club The Hindu ePaper Business Line ePaper Crossword + Free Games Other Products RoofandFloor STEP Images Classifieds - Print Special Publications eBooks The Hindu Coupons Popular Sections News Columns Social Issues Economy Books Arts & Culture Trending on frontline.thehindu.com The totalitarian project behind the electoral bonds scheme Did Periyar call for a genocide of Brahmins? ‘Bringing 1,000 elephants to Jamnagar makes no sense’: Raman Sukumar India’s low rank in World Happiness Report puts reasons for dissatisfaction in focus Kashmir candidates ‘nearly final’: Omar to replace Farooq in Srinagar; Mehbooba, Mian Altaf and Azad may clash in Anantnag-Rajouri Trending on our Group sites Atishi claims she received offer to join BJP, which denies claim and threatens legal action Eight reasons for Vistara’s massive flight cancellations Ambani and Adani unite: Reliance acquires 26% stake in Adani’s power project SC rebukes Ramdev, Acharya Balkrishna for ‘absolute defiance’ in Patanjali ad case IPL 2024 Points Table updated after MI vs RR: Rajasthan Royals moves to top; Mumbai Indians remains bottom Privacy policy Terms of Use Copyright © 2024, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. BACK TO TOP Sign in to Unlock member-only benefits! Bookmark stories to read later. Comment on stories to start conversations. Subscribe to our newsletters. Get notified about discounts and offers to our products. ✕ Looks like you are already logged in from more than 3 devices! To continue logging in, remove at least one device from the below list Log out Log Out from all devices Terms & conditions | Institutional Subscriber Comments Comments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide to our community guidelines for posting your comment