Israel-Hamas war: What's at stake for Indian economy? - India Today India Today Aaj Tak GNTTV Lallantop Business Today Bangla Malayalam Northeast BT Bazaar Harper's Bazaar Sports Tak Crime Tak Astro Tak Gaming Brides Today Cosmopolitan Kisan Tak Ishq FM India Today Hindi Reader’s Digest Aaj Tak Campus India Today Aaj Tak GNTTV Lallantop Business Today Bangla Malayalam Northeast BT Bazaar Harper's Bazaar Sports Tak Magazine Live TV Search SEARCH SIGN IN Edition IN IN US Home TV Live TV Primetime Elections Maharashtra Jharkhand Magazine Latest Edition Insight Best Colleges Life+Style India South World Business All Sports Sports Today WT20 World Cup Cricket Football Tennis Technology Entertainment Showbuzz Bollywood Hollywood OTT Latest Reviews Newspresso Specials Podcasts First Things Fast Sunday Special History of It NewsMo DIU Interactives Opinion Games Videos Short Videos Fact Check Other News Education It's Viral Science Health Auto Law Today Environment Cities Weather Web Stories Horoscopes Download App Follow Us On: News Business Israel-Hamas war: What's at stake for Indian economy? Israel-Hamas war: What's at stake for Indian economy? Domestic stock market investors have already been spooked by the ongoing conflict, with experts saying that any further escalation could negatively impact the broader Indian economy. Listen to Story Live TV Share Advertisement The ongoing conflict between Israel and Hamas could have a negative impact on Indian economy. (AFP) Koustav Das New Delhi , UPDATED: Oct 9, 2023 15:44 IST The ongoing war between Israel and Palestinian terrorist group Hamas has thrown a shadow of uncertainty over the Middle East's geopolitical stability. This development is concerning not only for the global economy but also for India, given its dependency on crude oil and its strong trade ties with Israel. Domestic stock market investors have already been spooked by the ongoing conflict , with experts saying that any further escalation could negatively impact the broader Indian economy. advertisement Costlier crude oil, higher inflation It is no secret that one of the immediate impacts of this conflict is the surge in oil prices. Now, this hits India hard because it's the world's third-largest importer of crude oil . When oil prices soar, it often leads to higher prices for everything, and that's not good news for a country that relies heavily on oil imports. It can trigger inflation and slow down economic growth. Palka Arora Chopra, Director of Master Capital Services Ltd, said, “Increasing geopolitical risk in the Middle East could raise oil prices. This could have a lasting and significant impact on oil markets, potentially resulting in a sustained reduction in oil supply. A surge in crude oil prices could affect domestic inflation and may lead to prolonged elevated interest rates.” Jayden Ong, Senior Market Analyst, APAC at Vantage, echoed Chopa’s views, stating, “Presently, there is a prevailing concern within the financial markets regarding the potential protraction of the ongoing conflict, leading to sustained upward pressure on crude oil prices.” “In conjunction with the OPEC+ production reduction agreement, this scenario is anticipated to contribute to a persistently elevated inflation rate. Consequently, central banks in diverse nations are expected to uphold elevated benchmark interest rates, a measure that may exacerbate the economic downturn,” Ong added. Simply put, higher crude oil prices could have a negative impact on India, where many sectors are already under pressure due to the rising energy costs. Any further increase in crude oil prices could stoke inflation, which has been on a downward trend but still remains significantly above the Reserve Bank of India’s upper limit of 6 per cent. Trade complications India's close relationship with Israel adds a twist to the tale. Israel is a significant trade partner for India, ranking as the third-largest in Asia and tenth globally. According to the Ministry of External Affairs, bilateral trade between the two countries has diversified into several sectors such as pharmaceuticals, agriculture, water, IT and telecom. Major exports from India to Israel include precious stones and metals, chemical products and textiles. On the other hand, major exports from Israel to India include pearls and precious stones, chemical and mineral/fertilizer products, machinery and electrical equipment, petroleum oils, defense, machinery and transport equipment. So, any escalation in the conflict between Israel and Hamas could disrupt the trade between these two nations, affecting a broad spectrum of industries. In FY2022-23, Indian merchandise exports to Israel amounted to $7.89 billion, while Israeli exports to India were $2.13 billion. Therefore, the total stood at over $10 billion . India also has substantial investments in Israel. According to data, the cumulative overseas direct investment from India during April 2000 to May 2023 was $383 million. Indian firms like TCS, State Bank of India, Jain Irrigation, Sun Pharma, Infosys, Tech Mahindra, Adani, and Wipro are among the major Indian companies that operate in some capacity or have made acquisitions or investments in Israel. In simpler terms, the Israel-Hamas conflict isn't just a regional issue that impacts the Middle East. Further escalation could have a drastic impact on several countries around the globe, including India. Published By: Koustav Das Published On: Oct 9, 2023 Must Watch Watch Live TV Advertisement Also Watch Thick smog blankets Delhi-NCR as air quality remains 'very poor' What does Trump in the White House mean for India? Ex-Indian envoy responds Jharkhand elections phase 1: NDA vs INDIA bloc face-off with crucial tribal votes in play Maharashtra election: Uddhav Thackeray chopper security check sparks row Musk and Ramaswamy appointed to lead US government efficiency department Advertisement Read This Empowering youth: Why India's new internship scheme is a game changer Above my pay grade: Inglis on Australia naming 'B' side vs Pakistan in T20Is Shaheen Afridi replaces Keshav Maharaj at top spot in ICC ODI bowling rankings Another sedan is ready for makeover. Not City, Verna, Slavia India announces Rs 15,000 crore RRTS corridor connecting Noida and Gurugram TRENDING TOPICS Suzlon Share Price Crashed Swiggy or Zomato Swiggy Listing Price Advertisement Follow Us On: Advertisement PUBLICATIONS India Today Business Today India Today-Hindi TIME TELEVISION India Today TV Aaj Tak Good News Today EVENTS Agenda AajTak India Today Conclave Sahitya AajTak RADIO Ishq FM AajTak Radio GAMING India Today Gaming World Esports Cup USEFUL LINKS Press Release Sitemap News Newsletter Privacy Policy Correction Policy LMIL Documents PRINTING Thomson Press WELFARE Care Today DISTRIBUTION Rate Card SYNDICATIONS Headlines Today WEBSITES India Today India Today Malayalam India Today NE Business Today DailyO AajTak Lallantop Bangla GNTTV iChowk Reader’s Digest Cosmopolitan EDUCATION Vasant Valley Best Colleges Best Universities TRENDING TOPICS Pakistani TikTok Star Private Video Swiggy Listing Price Elon Musk Siddaramaiah Nitin Gadkari's Helicopter Priyanka Gandhi AQI in Delhi Jharkhand Election Phase 1 Live LATEST Suzlon Share Price Crashed Vistara Last Flight Video Swiggy or Zomato Download App ABOUT US CONTACT US TERMS AND CONDITIONS ARCHIVES Copyright © 2024 Living Media India Limited. For reprint rights: Syndications Today