Escalated Middle East Conflict Could Hike Oil Price To Wednesday, November 13, 2024 SUBSCRIBE 🔍 Home Magazines Advertising Events Videos Contact us Podcast Subscribe Shipbuilding Offshore Coastal/Inland Government Equipment Training Law & Regulations Escalated Middle East Conflict Could Hike Oil Price to $150/barrel, Bloomberg Finds Maritime Activity Reports, Inc. May 7, 2024 © namning / Adobe Stock So far, the Israel-Hamas conflict has had limited impact on the global economy. However, an escalation to a direct war between Israel and Iran, could result in oil prices rising to $150 a barrel and global output cut by $1 trillion, according to a new analysis by Bloomberg Intelligence (BI) and Bloomberg Economics (BE). The new study from BI and BE – Middle East Energy Scenarios – looks in detail at four broad scenarios and their potential impact on global GDP and inflation, from a sustained ceasefire to a confined conflict, a multi-front proxy war and a larger war involving direct conflict between Israel and Iran. Significant disruption of production in the Persian Gulf region, which produces almost 20% of the world’s oil, or to transport of oil in the extreme case of a potential blockage of the Strait of Hormuz, could shift OPEC+ policy to maximum output, according to BI and BE. In this case the spare production capacity in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait would become ‘irrelevant’ if the strait is shuttered. According to scenarios featured in the analysis, a proxy war, where Iran and Israel clash through proxies such as Lebanon and Syria, while less destructive than a direct war, may cost the global economy up to $300 billion, as prices jump up around $10 a barrel and investor confidence subsides. This could cause a 0.3% percentage-point drag on global growth in 2024, which would be that would be the weakest growth in three decades (omitting the 2008 and 2020). A confined war scenario, characterized by limited Israeli airstrikes on Gaza and Hamas rocket attacks, could have muted impact on the global economy. Oil prices shrugged off Iran’s April 13 strikes on Israel, suggesting that markets see the extension on of a confined war as the most likely scenario. BI and BE see risks for oil skewed to the upside as healthy demand and OPEC+’s tight grip on supply from a solid fundamental backdrop. The impact of a potential cease-fire on oil prices would likely remain limited as the current geopolitical risk premium appears negligible. In a recent BI survey, 92% of 143 respondents said that there’s a less than $5 a barrel geopolitical risk premium attached to prices by the market. Red Sea attacks have had a limited effect on prices so far and OPEC has a meaningful amount of spare capacity (c. 6.8m barrels a day), nots BI. Moreover, OPEC+ output policy likely won’t change in a cease-fire scenarios if the impact on prices remains constrained. “Our base case is that the war will remain largely confined, as it has been since October, with limited impact on the global economy. But this could change. A risk scenario involving a prolonged conflict could result in a global recession that takes about $1 trillion off global GDP, with surging oil prices and plummeting sentiment dropping growth to 1.7%. "Outside of the financial crisis and pandemic, that would be the worst growth for world economy since 1982, when the Federal Reserve hiked interest rates to contain inflation from the 1970s oil shock. “The world economy is still recovering from an inflationary cycle exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, and another conflict in a critical energy-producing region could significantly recharge inflation to nearly 7% this year. "The Fed’s 2% target would then be far out of reach and costlier gasoline would be a hurdle for President Joe Biden’s re-election campaign,” said Ziad Daoud, Chief Emerging Markets Economist at Bloomberg Economics and co-author of the report. “OPEC+ members with spare capacity, like Russia and Kazakhstan, would benefit as they would have room to maximize production at higher prices to compensate for reduced output from the Gulf countries in the cartel. "The US would likely have to tap its Strategic Petroleum Reserve to make up for some of the lost barrels and limit the impact on prices at the pump. “In addition, a direct war in the Middle East could push prices for liquified natural gas up by at least 35% if a Gulf-region conflict disrupts flows from Qatar, which sends more than 10 billion cubic feet of LNG through the Strait of Hormuz every day,” added Salih Yilmaz, Senior Oil Analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence and co-author of the report. Offshore • Middle East • Industry News • Activity • shipping • Oil and Gas • Red Sea Related News 12 Nov 2024 Importance of Proactive Security Monitoring to Beat Cyber Security Threats Malicious cyber activity in the first six months in the maritime sector increased significantly compared to the previous year… 12 Nov 2024 China Ups Pressure on Philippines to Cede Claims in South China Sea China is stepping up pressure on the Philippines to concede its sovereign rights in the South China Sea, Manila's Defense… 11 Nov 2024 Strategic Marine Bags Six Vessels Construction Order, Lines Up Six More Singapore-based shipbuilder Strategic Marine has signed a significant contract with Mainprize Offshore for the construction of six Supa Swath vessels… 09 Nov 2024 Panama Canal Eyes Doubling Container Transits The Panama Canal Authority could double in coming years the number of containers that move through the commercial waterway… Sponsored Content Lower carbon intensity fuels to support your operations Get lower carbon intensity solutions customized for your business needs RSVP for MSC's Philippines virtual job fair For the first time ever, Military Sealift Command is hosting a virtual job fair to reach US Citizens in the Philippines who are interested in a maritime career. Enhancing Gas Carrier Reporting and Reducing Crew Burden with ABS Wavesight Nautical Systems™ Voyage Manager Gas carrier reporting presents distinctive challenges due to the specialized nature of LNG cargo. From complex loading and unloading procedures to stringent safety regulations Jobs 🔍 First Assistant Engineer (Rotational 60/30) ● NOAA Chief Radio Electronics Technician IAT - Mixed Work Schedule ● Military Sealift Command Cook Baker ● Military Sealift Command Medical Services Officer ● Military Sealift Command Able Seaman - Mixed Work Schedule ● Military Sealift Command Post Resume Employers – Post Jobs Podcast Beating the Heat: R.W. Fernstrum & Company Celebrates 75 Sponsored Content Lower carbon intensity fuels to support your operations Subscribe for Maritime Reporter E-News Maritime Reporter E-News is the maritime industry's largest circulation and most authoritative ENews Service, delivered to your Email five times per week Subscribe to Maritime Reporter Magazine Subscribe to Marine News Magazine Subscribe to Maritime Reporter Email News Maritime Intelligence Terms and Conditions Copyright Privacy Maritime News Archive Maritime Articles Authors © 1996-2024 Maritime Activity Reports, Inc. Maritime Logistics News Maritine Technology News World Energy News Maritime Jobs Yachting News Marine Electronics Maritime Propulsion News Maritime Reporter Magazine Marine News Magazine Maritime Logistics Marine Technology Magazine Maritime Magazines White Papers US Maritime Intelligence Maritime Directory Maritime Companies