Global geopolitical tensions often play a pivotal role in shaping people’s perceptions of economic growth. Research shows concern about such issues can cause people and businesses to become more cautious about spending and investing, which can ultimately lead to economic recession.

The recent escalation of the Israel-Palestine conflict is no different. Investors around the world are worried about the repercussions of this war – particularly in light of an already bleak picture for global economic growth.

Hamas’s October 7 attack on southern Israel is the latest chapter of a cycle of violence that has been going on in this region for decades and, sadly, seems to have no end in sight. While the reasons behind these events are complex, the conflict’s potential immediate and long-term economic ramifications are easier to grasp.

After all, if the Russia-Ukraine war has taught us one thing, it’s that we should be mindful of the intricate interdependencies that shape the global economic and geopolitical landscape.

Read more: Ukraine and the financial markets: the winners and losers so far

How conflicts can affect the economy
Internal and inter-state conflicts often have a significant effect on stock market indices, exchange rates, and commodity prices – sometimes even sending prices higher in the lead-up to hostilities. The longer-term economic impact is typically more complicated to assess, however. The lasting effects of even seemingly dramatic events on investor behaviour can be hard to predict.

Conflicts in the Middle East tend to lead to spikes in oil prices – think of the OPEC oil embargo of 1973-1974, the Iranian revolution of 1978-1979, the Iran-Iraq War initiated in 1980, and the first Persian Gulf War in 1990-91. Since the region accounts for nearly a third of global oil supply, any instability can create market uncertainty based on concerns about interruptions to global oil supply.

This uncertainty is reflected in the risk premium in oil markets. This is the price paid for oil traded ahead of time in the futures markets versus the real-time price of oil. It reflects the profits that speculators expect to receive from buying and selling oil during a time of conflict, as well as the hedging needs of businesses that produce and consume oil and their concerns about supply and demand.

And so, the effect of the latest Israel-Hamas conflict on global financial markets will depend on the involvement of other major regional powers. If the conflict remains between Israel and Hamas, the effect will probably be limited and arguably exclusive to countries with direct trade exposure to Israel or Palestine.

But if the conflict spreads to major oil-producing nations in the region such as Iran, the global economy could face severe repercussions as energy costs for businesses and households could spike if supply is interrupted.

Higher energy prices would hamper central banks’ efforts to tame inflation pressures in most advanced and emerging economies. If this leads to a “higher for longer” monetary policy that keeps interest rates elevated, it would push up the cost of borrowing and refinancing by governments, companies and people.

History can offer some insights into how the impact on the global economy could unfold under these different scenarios. For instance, the 50-day war between Israel and Hamas in 2014, which killed 2,200 people, mostly civilians, had no significant effect on the global economy or financial markets.

Yet, when Israel and Hezbollah clashed in Lebanon in 2006, oil prices surged globally due to fears of a broader conflict in the Middle East.

What to expect this time
Unfortunately, there is another factor to consider at the moment. The escalation of the Israel-Palestine conflict has happened alongside the realignment of various global alliances. This slow creep of “deglobalisation” can be seen in a shift in trade policies in recent years.

Countries such as the US and UK are relocating economic activity including sourcing or manufacturing products from different countries out of concern about relying on suppliers in potentially hostile regions, as well as the impact of imports from low-wage countries on struggling local labour markets

At the moment, these shifts can also be seen in the reactions to the Hamas attack on Israel. A two-state solution) to the Israel/Palestine conflict was initially laid out by the United Nations in 1947 and reaffirmed in 1974, with almost unanimous support around the world.

But there has been some nuance in the international reactions to the attack. With most western countries quickly voicing support for Israel’s right to defend itself, while countries like China and Russia called for a ceasefire without taking a stance on Hamas.

This suggests that the issue of Israel-Palestine could tie in with the broader trend towards the new geopolitical divisions that were already starting to emerge before Hamas’s attack.

A prolonged conflict between Israel and Palestine, especially with the involvement of major regional powers, could further accelerate this global realignment and have detrimental consequences for global economic growth.

Read more: China-US tensions: how global trade began splitting into two blocs

Gold bars on top of dollar bills and a printed chart.
Investors often invest in gold as a eamesBot/Shutterstock
Under these circumstances, investors are already bracing for increased financial volatility across the board – from stocks and government bonds to commodity markets. So-called safe-haven assets like gold are typically used as protection against overwhelming economic uncertainty. The price of gold has shot up following the latest escalation in the Israel-Palestine conflict.

Financial markets will continue to monitor the conflict between Israel and Hamas for signs of escalation. Anything that pushes oil prices up further will reignite fears of higher inflation.

Unfortunately, this is happening just as many countries were starting to see inflation slow again after two years of persistently high consumer prices.

Financial markets
Gold
Global economy
Oil prices
Stock markets
Commodity prices
Give me perspective
Israel-Hamas conflict
Keep up with the global economy …
Interest rate decisions, the cost of living and the global scam economay all have impacts on business we need to be aware of.

This is why I co-write a weekly business and economy email newsletter. It brings a curated summary of the week's briefings from academic researchers around the world straight to your inbox. And it's free.


DALLAS, Oct 8 (Reuters) - The outbreak of military conflict in the Middle East may leave central bankers battling new inflationary trends as well as deal a blow to economic confidence at a time when they had expressed growing hope about containing the price surge sparked by the pandemic and Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine.
The stunning violence in Israel, with hundreds killed as fighters from the Hamas movement invaded from their Gaza enclave and Israel responded in force, added the possibility of a broader Middle East conflict to the sense of global instability sparked by Russian military actions almost 20 months ago.
Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Report this ad
The impact may take time to become clear, and would depend on how long the conflict lasts, how intense it becomes, and whether it spreads to other parts of the region.
"It’s too early to say" what the implications may be, though oil and equity markets may see immediate fallout, Agustin Carstens, general manager of the Bank for International Settlements, said in a presentation to the National Association for Business Economics.
Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Report this ad
But the war has the potential at least to add an unpredictable set of forces to a global economy that was already slowing and to U.S. markets still adapting to the likelihood that the Federal Reserve will maintain high interest rates longer than many investors had expected.
"Any source of economic uncertainty delays decision-making, increases risk premia, and especially given that region...there is an apprehension about where oil is going to open," said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist with Northern Trust.
"The markets will also be following what the scenarios are looking like," he said, and whether, after decades of instability in the Middle East, this outbreak of violence evolves differently.
"The question will be is this iteration something that will throw the long-term equilibrium out of balance?"
BLOW TO CONFIDENCE
That and related issues will likely vault high on the agenda of global financial leaders gathering this week in Morocco for meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank to take stock of a global economy that remains in a deep state of flux from the pandemic and rising trade tensions.

For central banks it poses the dilemma of whether it is likely to lead to new inflation pressures - the region is not just home to major oil producers like Iran and Saudi Arabia, but also to major shipping lanes through the Gulf of Suez - or deal such a blow to confidence that the economy stutters.
Federal Reserve officials have cited recent high energy prices as a possible risk to their outlook of gradually easing inflation, and also said that they felt the U.S. economy was likely to avoid a recession - absent some sort of unexpected, outside shock.
With conflict now raging in a major oil-producing region, the reaction among traders and major players like Iran and Saudi Arabia will be watched closely to see if another price surge is coming, while trading on bond and stock markets in coming days will show how markets anticipate the likely fallout.
"The conflict poses a risk of higher oil prices, and risks to both inflation and the growth outlook," said Karim Basta, chief economist at III Capital Management, leaving the Fed to sort out whether higher prices or slower growth is the greater concern.
Fed officials were already watching a recent rise in U.S. Treasury bond yields for signs investors may have pushed financial conditions beyond what was needed to cool inflation, and raised the risk of a too-stark economic slowing.
To the extent the Israeli war with Hamas heightens concerns about the global economy it could reverse that trend if capital rushes towards the relative safety of U.S. Treasury bonds, as often happens at times of potential crisis.
While falling market interest rates might under other circumstances be seen as a possible source of renewed inflation, encouraging consumers and businesses to borrow and spend, the context might lead to a different conclusion with emphasis on the perceived risks to the economy of a new regional war.


How Israel-Gaza war could impact global markets
By Naomi Rovnick, Nell Mackenzie and Marc Jones
October 18, 20237:32 PM GMT+5:30Updated a year ago



Electronic boards showing stock information are pictured at the stock market, in Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Electronic boards showing stock information are pictured at the stock market, in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, November 5, 2020. REUTERS/Abdel Hadi Ramahi/ File Photo Purchase Licensing Rights, opens new tab
LONDON, Oct 18 (Reuters) - An escalation of the Israel-Gaza war into a broader conflict could deliver another shock to world growth and halt disinflationary forces in their tracks.
Market reaction has been modest so far, but that could change.
"Whether this conflict remains limited to a confrontation between Hamas and Israel or escalates into a broader regional conflict involving Iran's proxy armed groups, notably Hezbollah, will have significant implications," said Hamza Meddeb, director of the political economy programme at the Malcolm H. Kerr Carnegie Middle East Center in Beirut.
Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Report this ad
"Such an escalation could lead to increased oil prices, concerns about oil supply, and the potential for a global economic downturn."
Here are some scenarios in focus.
1/ IRAN, THEN OIL
The potential for Iran to become more involved and for a U.S. response that sees a scaling up of sanctions on Iranian oil is in the spotlight.
"A crackdown on Iranian oil exports could immediately remove somewhere from 1-2 mbd (million barrels per day) off (the) market almost instantly," said hedge fund Cayler Capital's founder and CIO Brent Belote.
Advertisement · Scroll to continue

Report this ad
In the unlikely event the United States sends troops into the Middle East, Belote expected a $20 jump in oil prices, "if not more".
Oil jumped over 2% to over $92 on Wednesday and gained 7.5% last week.
From October 1973 to March 1974, as the Yom Kippur war prompted an oil embargo on Israel's supporters by Arab nations, oil surged over 300%.
"Israel has better relations with other Arab countries compared to then," JP Morgan private bank strategist Madison Faller said in a note, "and global oil supply is not as concentrated."
Wall Street's main indexes closed lower on Tuesday as investors turned cautious ahead of economic data due this week.




Nadia Martin Wiggen, director at commodity investor Svelland Capital, added a regional conflict would disrupt oil tanker routes in the Mediterranean, Black Sea and around Turkey.
Reuters Graphics
Reuters Graphics
Reuters Graphics
Reuters Graphics
2/ INFLATION SPIKE?
An inflation surge has eased and global rate hikes are nearing an end.
A spike in oil, which briefly hit $139 after Russia's invasion of Ukraine last year, could halt inflation's downward move. Gas prices surged 45% last week , another worrying sign.

"If Iran gets involved that means higher commodity prices, higher external shocks, and this is a trigger for a less disinflationary outlook," said Alessia Berardi, head of emerging markets macro and strategy research at Amundi, stressing this was not her base case.
Long-term market gauges of U.S. and euro area inflation expectations suggest inflation staying above 2% targets.
Further pain for bond investors could be likely. The S&P U.S. aggregate bond index (.SPUSAGGT), opens new tab, a marker of how Treasuries and corporate debt are performing, is 14% below January 2021 peaks.
Reuters Graphics
Reuters Graphics
3/ STRONG DOLLAR?
Demand for safe-havens has boosted the dollar, pushing it towards 150 yen, and the Swiss franc, which on Friday posted its best day against the euro since January.
The dollar may not be a one-way bet if high oil and inflation trigger a U.S. recession, said Amundi's Berardi.
Trevor Greetham, head of multi-asset at Royal London, said any "global risk-off move" could also strengthen the yen as "Japanese investors pull their money home."
Reuters Graphics
Reuters Graphics
4/ SUBMERGING MARKETS
Israel's currency, bonds and stocks have been hit by the troubles, as have those in Egypt, Jordan and Iraq and to a lesser degree Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Bahrain.
After a difficult couple of years, the Israel-Gaza war "is just one more thing dampening emerging market sentiment," said Barings' Head of EM Corporate Debt Omotunde Lawal.
She is cautiously optimistic that most other emerging markets are largely shrugging off tensions for now. Morgan Stanley does not expect contagion either.
But Aegon Asset Management's Jeff Grills warned a regional escalation could "easily" see oil jump 20%, hurting dozens of already-impoverished oil importing countries.
Reuters Graphics
Reuters Graphics
5/ TECH JITTERS
What's good for oil stocks can be bad for big tech.
MSCI's gauge of global tech stocks (.dMIWO0IT00PUS), opens new tab moved inversely to oil and gas shares (.dMIWO0OG00PUS), opens new tab in 2022 as war in Ukraine pushed up oil, feeding inflation fears that were captured by higher bond yields.
That pattern could form again, Royal London's Greetham said, if U.S. rates rise again to contain the inflationary effects of the latest conflict.
The potential disruption to infrastructure is also a risk.
"Egypt is one location where multiple intercontinental cables cross land in a digital Suez Canal," Deutsche Bank said. "At least 17% of global internet traffic crosses this route."
Airline stocks meanwhile could suffer while defence stocks outperform. Since the Oct. 7 Hamas attacks in Israel, MSCI's airline stock index is down about 5% (.dMIWO0AL00PUS), opens new tab. Aerospace and defence shares are almost 6% higher (.dMIWO0AD00PUS), opens new tab.