As Middle East tensions simmer, the world fixates on the wrong energy market risks - Atlantic Council Share Close Mail Facebook Twitter / X LinkedIn Insight Issue briefs and reports Issue briefs and reports Our programs and centers deliver in-depth, highly relevant issue briefs and reports that break new ground, shift opinions, and set agendas on public policy, with a focus on advancing debates by integrating foundational research and analysis with concrete policy solutions. Fast Thinking Fast Thinking When major global news breaks, the Atlantic Council’s experts have you covered—delivering their sharpest rapid insight and forward-looking analysis direct to your inbox. New Atlanticist New Atlanticist New Atlanticist is where top experts and policymakers at the Atlantic Council and beyond offer exclusive insight on the most pressing global challenges—and the United States’ role in addressing them alongside its allies and partners. Inflection Points Inflection Points A weekly column by Atlantic Council President and CEO Frederick Kempe, Inflection Points focuses on the global challenges facing the United States and how to best address them. UkraineAlert UkraineAlert UkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture. UkraineAlert sources analysis and commentary from a wide-array of thought-leaders, politicians, experts, and activists from Ukraine and the global community. MENASource MENASource MENASource offers the latest news from across the Middle East, combined with commentary by contributors, interviews with emerging players, multi-media content, and independent analysis from fellows and staff. Econographics Econographics Econographics provides an in-depth look at trends in the global economy utilizing state-of-the-art data visualization tools. More sections AfricaSource EnergySource GeoTech Cues IranSource TurkeySource Events Upcoming events AC Front Page Galas and flagship events ACTV Issues Politics & Diplomacy Sub-issues All Politics & Diplomacy Corruption Democratic Transitions Elections Freedom and Prosperity G20 International Norms Media Political Reform Rule of Law International Organizations United Nations Security & Defense Sub-issues All Security & Defense Arms Control Conflict Defense Industry Defense Policy Defense Technologies Extremism Intelligence National Security NATO Non-Traditional Threats Nuclear Deterrence Nuclear Nonproliferation Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding Security Partnerships Terrorism Economy & Business Sub-issues All Economy & Business Digital Currencies Digital Policy Economic Sanctions Eurozone Financial Regulation Fiscal and Structural Reform Future of Work Inclusive Growth International Financial Institutions International Markets Macroeconomics Trade Energy & Environment Sub-issues All Energy & Environment Climate Change & Climate Action Energy Markets & Governance Energy Transitions Geopolitics & Energy Security Nuclear Energy Oil & Gas Renewables & Advanced Energy Resilience & Society Sub-issues All Resilience & Society Civil Society Coronavirus Education Human Rights Migration Nationalism Populism Resilience Women Youth Technology & Innovation Sub-issues All Technology & Innovation Cybersecurity Disinformation Drones Entrepreneurship Internet Internet of Things Space Regions Africa Sub-regions All Africa Angola Democratic Republic of the Congo East Africa Eritrea Ethiopia General Africa Morocco Nigeria North & West Africa Sahel South & Central Africa South Africa Sudan Somalia Americas Sub-regions All Americas United States and Canada Latin America Brazil Caribbean Colombia Cuba Mexico Northern Triangle Venezuela Europe & Eurasia Sub-regions All Europe & Eurasia European Union The Balkans Belarus The Caucasus France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Moldova Poland Russia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Indo-Pacific Sub-regions All Indo-Pacific Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh China India Japan Korea Pakistan Taiwan Middle East Sub-regions All Middle East The Gulf North Africa Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Libya Saudi Arabia Syria Yemen Experts Find an expert Request a media interview About Programs Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security Climate Resilience Center Adrienne Arsht Latin America Center Rafik Hariri Center & Middle East programs Africa Center Digital Forensic Research Lab Eurasia Center Europe Center GeoEconomics Center GeoTech Center Global Energy Center Millennium Leadership Program South Asia Center Atlantic Council in Turkey Global China Hub Freedom and Prosperity Center Visit or contact us About the Atlantic Council Diversity, equity, and inclusion Get involved Leadership & governance For media Subscribe by email Find job opportunities Donate Insight Issue briefs and reports Fast Thinking New Atlanticist Inflection Points UkraineAlert MENASource Econographics More sections Events Upcoming events AC Front Page Galas and flagship events ACTV Issues Politics & Diplomacy Security & Defense Economy & Business Energy & Environment Resilience & Society Technology & Innovation Regions Africa Americas Europe & Eurasia Indo-Pacific Middle East Experts Find an expert Request a media interview About Programs Visit or contact us About the Atlantic Council Diversity, equity, and inclusion Get involved Leadership & governance For media Subscribe by email Find job opportunities Donate Conflict Energy & Environment Geopolitics & Energy Security Iran Israel Maritime Security Middle East EnergySource September 17, 2024 As Middle East tensions simmer, the world fixates on the wrong energy market risks By Ellen Wald As the anniversary of Hamas’ devastating October 7 attack on Israel approaches and the escalation of the Israel-Gaza war continues, tensions in the Middle East show no signs of receding. Iran’s role in supplying, training, and facilitating attacks from Hamas, Hezbollah, and the Houthis is well-known, but fears persist that dismantling this network will lead to a serious escalation with Iran and threaten global energy supplies. But the real risks to the energy sector are not the ones that policymakers and oil traders are focused on. STAY CONNECTED Sign up for PowerPlay, the Atlantic Council’s bimonthly newsletter keeping you up to date on all facets of the energy transition. The risks in the Strait of Hormuz are overblown The risk that Iran could close the Strait of Hormuz looms large among government and industry leaders, given that one fifth of global petroleum liquids consumption and liquefied natural gas (LNG) trade flows through this narrow waterway. The impacts would be devastating to the global economy—particularly for Asian consumers of Gulf oil. However, the economic, political, and geographic realities mean that—not only is Iran extremely unlikely to close the strait—it is practically impossible for it to do so. Economically, Iran has too much to lose. The country exports 1.5 million barrels per day of oil in contravention of US sanctions, up massively from 350,000 in 2019. If the country refused to allow non-Iranian tankers to exit the Gulf, it would expose its own tankers to foreign navies, threatening Tehran’s primary source of revenue. As long as Iran continues to make money selling oil, it will not close the strait. Politically, Iran can’t afford to jeopardize its relations with the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Saudi Arabia, or China. Over the past five years, Iran has painstakingly rebuilt ties with Saudi Arabia, the most powerful Gulf state, and the UAE, Iran’s most important trading partner . Nor can Iran afford to alienate its best customer and the largest overall importer of Gulf oil—China. Samir Madani, co-founder of TankerTrackers.com , Inc., an independent company that tracks seaborne oil, said it would be incredibly ill-advised for Iran to disrupt Beijing’s oil supply from the Gulf. Even if Iran were desperate enough to attempt closing the strait, it’s unclear if it could even halt shipping. While the safest and most efficient route through the Strait of Hormuz traverses Iranian waters, tankers can— and do —deviate from it by going through UAE waters. After two British tankers were seized by Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) ships in 2019, British ships were instructed to avoid Iranian waters despite the increased likelihood of a collision. While a mass rerouting of traffic through UAE waters would be slow and restrict transit volumes, it would be possible for oil flows to continue. Rather than focusing on a worst-case but extremely unlikely scenario in the Gulf, policymakers should focus on more realistic energy risks in the region. Instead, worry about disruptions to Israel’s natural gas exports… Israel produces natural gas through two offshore gas fields, Tamar and Leviathan, which meet Israel’s domestic needs and supply gas to Jordan and Egypt. Egypt uses Israeli gas for domestic demand or liquefies and exports it to Europe. After the October 7 attacks, Israel shut down production from Tamar, forcing Egypt to halt shipments and causing a brief spike in European natural gas prices. At the end of November, Israel resumed flows to Egypt, and exports to Europe continued at lower levels than before the attacks. Since April, however, Egypt has halted all LNG exports in order to use Israel’s natural gas to meet domestic electricity demand . Israel’s natural gas fields remain vulnerable in the event of a military escalation between Israel and Hezbollah. If gas exports were halted, Egypt—which plays an important role in ceasefire negotiations between Israel and Hamas—could face an energy shortage. Decisionmakers involved in negotiations could offer incentives that would increase Israel’s natural gas deliveries to Egypt or help alleviate Egypt’s power crunch with other sources of natural gas, in exchange for Cairo exerting more pressure on Hamas to accept ceasefire terms. It would also behoove policymakers to help the two countries expedite plans to build a 40-mile pipeline that would enable Israel to export an additional 6 billion cubic meters per year of natural gas to Egypt. Increasing energy interdependence would not only improve economic and diplomatic relations in the region; but also, increasing Israel’s gas export capacity to Egypt’s liquefaction facilities serves as an insurance policy for southern Europe in the event of a supply crunch. …And escalation in the Red Sea Policymakers should work to neutralize the threat of Houthi attacks on ships transiting the Red Sea. Iran is supplying the equipment the Houthis are using to threaten seaborne trade. Since October, the Houthis have attacked more than eighty merchant ships—and dry bulk traffic through the Suez Canal is down 50 percent year-over-year. While some oil tankers now avoid the Red Sea, most have continued to cross the Suez despite higher insurance costs. A recent attack on a Greek-flagged tanker, the Sounion , should be a wakeup call. The attack caused a fire aboard the ship, which has been abandoned. The vessel, carrying 1 million barrels of oil, is now leaking —if that continues, the environmental disaster could be four times greater than the Exxon Valdez oil spill. While the crew was able to escape, efforts to salvage the ship were called off because the Houthis planted explosives on its deck. The pattern of escalation in the Red Sea cannot be ignored—whereas previously the Houthis confined their attacks to ships affiliated with Israel or Israeli citizens, this is no longer the case. Since the Sounion attack, insurance companies have nearly doubled the risk premium for Red Sea-bound ships. Only Chinese-owned ships seem to be safe—their insurance premiums have dropped by 50 percent since February. On September 2, US Central Command (CENTCOM) reported that the Houthis attacked and hit two oil tankers in the Red Sea, one of which was a Saudi very large crude carrier (VLCC) tanker carrying 2 million barrels of oil. The Houthis claimed responsibility only for the attack on the non-Saudi tanker. Saudi Arabia denied that its ship was hit, although the US military maintains that both ships were damaged by “reckless acts of terrorism by the Houthis.” Though the specifics of the incident remain in dispute, the risks are clear: millions of barrels of oil could spill into the Red Sea or ignite in fires that cannot be extinguished. The ensuing environmental catastrophe and economic disruption would hit all producers and consumers that use the waterway regardless of their political stance on Middle East conflicts. Even if Saudi Arabia can’t publicly acknowledge that its tankers are at risk, it has just as much—if not more—to lose from attacks in the Red Sea. Even the presence of US naval forces has not deterred the Houthis. US destroyers stationed in the Red Sea faced sustained combat rivalling that experienced during World War II—and still could not thwart every attack. Policymakers need to realize that Houthi activity in the Red Sea is a serious and growing risk to global energy supplies. Currently, the risk is being realized in insurance rates but could quickly spread throughout the global oil market if another tanker is hit. Focus on the real risks The ongoing conflict in the Middle East has challenged long-held assumptions about the risk geopolitical instability in a critical region for global energy supplies poses to world markets. Old paradigms, particularly those focusing on the Strait of Hormuz, no longer apply. If industry and financial experts priced in the actual risks to global energy supplies instead of focusing on unlikelier ones, world leaders might be more motivated to better ensure the security of global maritime transportation in the Red Sea. Ellen Wald is a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council Global Energy Center and the co-founder of Washington Ivy Advisors. EnergySource EnergySource is the Global Energy Center’s (GEC) online publication providing commentary and analysis on developments in the energy and climate sector from a wide-array of thought leaders, politicians, and experts. Read more Meet the author Fellow Ellen Wald Nonresident Senior Fellow Global Energy Center Energy & Environment Oil and Gas Related content EnergySource Apr 16, 2024 What Iran’s attack on Israel means for global energy By Atlantic Council experts On the weekend of April 13th, energy markets have shown a muted response to Iran’s unprecedented attack on Israel. As Israel weighs its response, the risks to fuel prices and global energy security are extremely high. Our experts comment on what to watch for. Energy & Environment Energy Markets & Governance EnergySource Feb 21, 2024 Escalating Middle East conflict means North America must bolster global energy security By Julia Nesheiwat The Houthi attacks on ships in the Red Sea have raised shipping costs and caused delays for certain traded goods. While global energy supply has remained uninterrupted, the threat of a broader conflict in the region raises the chances that there will be disruptive attacks on energy and transport infrastructure, putting energy security at risk. China Energy & Environment New Atlanticist Jan 25, 2024 Houthi attacks in the Red Sea hurt global trade and slow the energy transition By William Tobin , Joseph Webster Recent attacks on commercial shipping in the Red Sea are a reminder that a major disruption to freedom of navigation would hold many negative consequences. Economy & Business Energy & Environment Learn more about the Global Energy Center The Global Energy Center develops and promotes pragmatic and nonpartisan policy solutions designed to advance global energy security, enhance economic opportunity, and accelerate pathways to net-zero emissions. learn more Conflict Energy & Environment Geopolitics & Energy Security Iran Israel Maritime Security Middle East Image: The Tamar offshore natural gas field is pictured in front of Ashkelon, amid the ongoing conflict between Israel and Hamas, near the Gaza coast, June 25, 2024. REUTERS/Amir Cohen Print this page Share this page © 2024 Atlantic Council All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Terms and conditions of use Intellectual Independence Policy Government Funding Review Process Policy on donor acceptance and disclosure Modern Day Slavery and Anti-Human Trafficking Policy Photo credits We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. Ok